0	The Tales of Mother Goose/Blue Beard BLUE BEARD
1	Once upon a time there was a man who had fine houses , both in town and country , a deal of silver and gold plate , carved furniture , and coaches gilded all over .
2	But unhappily this man had a blue beard , which made him so ugly and so terrible that all the women and girls ran away from him .
3	One of his neighbors , a lady of quality , had two daughters who were perfect beauties .
4	He asked for one of them in marriage , leaving to her the choice of which she would bestow on him .
5	They would neither of them have him , and they sent him backward and forward from one to the other , neither being able to make up her mind to marry a man who had a blue beard .
6	Another thing which made them averse to him was that he had already married several wives , and nobody knew what had become of them .
7	Blue Beard , to become better acquainted , took them , with their mother and three or four of their best friends , with some young people of the neighborhood to one of his country seats , where they stayed a whole week .
8	There was nothing going on but pleasure parties , hunting , fishing , dancing , mirth , and feasting . Nobody went to bed , but all passed the night in playing pranks on each other . In short , everything succeeded so well that the youngest daughter began to think that the beard of the master of the house was not so very blue , and that he was a very civil gentleman .
9	So as soon as they returned home , the marriage was concluded .
10	About a month afterward Blue Beard told his wife that he was obliged to take a country journey for six weeks at least , upon business of great importance . He desired her to amuse herself well in his absence , to send for her friends , to take them into the country , if she pleased , and to live well wherever she was .
11	" Here , " said he , " are the keys of the two great warehouses wherein I have my best furniture : these are of the room where I keep my silver and gold plate , which is not in everyday use ; these open my safes , which hold my money , both gold and silver ; these my caskets of jewels ; and this is the master-key to all my apartments .
12	But as for this little key , it is the key of the closet at the end of the great gallery on the ground floor . Open them all ; go everywhere ; but as for that little closet , I forbid you to enter it , and I promise you surely that , if you open it , there 's nothing that you may not expect from my anger . "
13	She promised to obey exactly all his orders ; and he , after having embraced her , got into his coach and proceeded on his journey .
14	Her neighbors and good friends did not stay to be sent for by the new-married lady , so great was their impatience to see all the riches of her house , not daring to come while her husband was there , because of his blue beard , which frightened them .
15	They at once ran through all the rooms , closets , and wardrobes , which were so fine and rich , and each seemed to surpass all others .
16	They went up into the warehouses , where was the best and richest furniture ; and they could not sufficiently admire the number and beauty of the tapestry , beds , couches , cabinets , stands , tables , and looking-glasses , in which you might see yourself from head to foot . Some of them were framed with glass , others with silver , plain and gilded , the most beautiful and the most magnificent ever seen .
17	They ceased not to praise and envy the happiness of their friend , who , in the meantime , was not at all amused by looking upon all these rich things , because of her impatience to go and open the closet on the ground floor .
18	Her curiosity was so great that , without considering how uncivil it was to leave her guests , she went down a little back staircase , with such excessive haste that twice or thrice she came near breaking her neck .
19	Having reached the closet-door , she stood still for some time , thinking of her husband 's orders , and considering that unhappiness might attend her if she was disobedient ; but the temptation was so strong she could not overcome it . She then took the little key , and opened the door , trembling .
20	At first she could not see anything plainly , because the windows were shut .
21	After some moments she began to perceive that several dead women were scattered about the floor . ( These were all the wives whom Blue Beard had married and murdered , one after the other , because they did not obey his orders about the closet on the ground floor . )
22	She thought she surely would die for fear , and the key , which she pulled out of the lock , fell out of her hand .
23	After having somewhat recovered from the shock , she picked up the key , locked the door , and went upstairs into her chamber to compose herself ; but she could not rest , so much was she frightened .
24	Having observed that the key of the closet was stained , she tried two or three times to wipe off the stain , but the stain would not come out . In vain did she wash it , and even rub it with soap and sand . The stain still remained , for the key was a magic key , and she could never make it quite clean ; when the stain was gone off from one side , it came again on the other .
25	Blue Beard returned from his journey that same evening , and said he had received letters upon the road , informing him that the business which called him away was ended to his advantage .
26	His wife did all she could to convince him she was delighted at his speedy return .
27	Next morning he asked her for the keys , which she gave him , but with such a trembling hand that he easily guessed what had happened .
28	" How is it , " said he , " that the key of my closet is not among the rest ? "
29	" I must certainly , " said she , " have left it upstairs upon the table . "
30	" Do not fail , " said Blue Beard , " to bring it to me presently . "
31	After having put off doing it several times , she was forced to bring him the key .
32	Blue Beard , having examined it , said to his wife : -- " How comes this stain upon the key ? "
33	" I do not know , " cried the poor woman , paler than death .
34	" You do not know ! " replied Blue Beard . " I very well know .
35	You wished to go into the cabinet ?
36	Very well , madam ; you shall go in , and take your place among the ladies you saw there . "
37	She threw herself weeping at her husband 's feet , and begged his pardon with all the signs of a true repentance for her disobedience .
38	She would have melted a rock , so beautiful and sorrowful was she ; but Blue Beard had a heart harder than any stone .
39	" You must die , madam , " said he , " and that at once . "
40	" Since I must die , " answered she , looking upon him with her eyes all bathed in tears , " give me some little time to say my prayers . "
41	" I give you , " replied Blue Beard , " half a quarter of an hour , but not one moment more . "
42	When she was alone she called out to her sister , and said to her : — " Sister Anne , " — for that was her name , — " go up , I beg you , to the top of the tower , and look if my brothers are not coming ; they promised me they would come to-day , and if you see them , give them a sign to make haste . "
43	Her sister Anne went up to the top of the tower , and the poor afflicted wife cried out from time to time : — " Anne , sister Anne , do you see any one coming ? "
44	And sister Anne said : — " I see nothing but the sun , which makes a dust , and the grass , which looks green . "
45	In the meanwhile Blue Beard , holding a great sabre in his hand , cried to his wife as loud as he could : — " Come down instantly , or I shall come up to you . "
46	" One moment longer , if you please , " said his wife ; and then she cried out very softly , " Anne , sister Anne , dost thou see anybody coming ? "
47	And sister Anne answered : — " I see nothing but the sun , which makes a dust , and the grass , which is green . "
48	" Come down quickly , " cried Blue Beard , " or I will come up to you . " " I am coming , " answered his wife ; and then she cried , " Anne , sister Anne , dost thou not see any one coming ? "
49	" I see , " replied sister Anne , " a great dust , which comes from this side . "
50	" Are they my brothers ? "
51	" Alas ! no , my sister , I see a flock of sheep . "
52	" Will you not come down ? " cried Blue Beard .
53	" One moment longer , " said his wife , and then she cried out , " Anne , sister Anne , dost thou see nobody coming ? "
54	" I see , " said she , " two horsemen , but they are yet a great way off . "
55	" God be praised , " replied the poor wife , joyfully ; " they are my brothers ; I will make them a sign , as well as I can , for them to make haste . "
56	Then Blue Beard bawled out so loud that he made the whole house tremble .
57	The distressed wife came down , and threw herself at his feet , all in tears , with her hair about her shoulders .
58	" All this is of no help to you , " says Blue Beard ; " you must die " ; then , taking hold of her hair with one hand , and lifting up his sword in the air with the other , he was about to take off her head .
59	The poor lady , turning about to him , and looking at him with dying eyes , desired him to afford her one little moment to her thoughts .
60	" No , no , " said he , " commend thyself to God , " and again lifting his arm —
61	At this moment there was such a loud knocking at the gate that Blue Beard stopped suddenly .
62	The gate was opened , and presently entered two horsemen , who , with sword in hand , ran directly to Blue Beard .
63	He knew them to be his wife 's brothers , one a dragoon , the other a musketeer . He ran away immediately , but the two brothers pursued him so closely that they overtook him before he could get to the steps of the porch .
64	There they ran their swords through his body , and left him dead .
65	The poor wife was almost as dead as her husband , and had not strength enough to arise and welcome her brothers .
66	Blue Beard had no heirs , and so his wife became mistress of all his estate .
67	She made use of one portion of it to marry her sister Anne to a young gentleman who had loved her a long while ; another portion to buy captains' commissions for her brothers ; and the rest to marry herself to a very worthy gentleman , who made her forget the sorry time she had passed with Blue Beard .
