0	The Inn
1	Resembling in appearance all the wooden hostelries of the High Alps situated at the foot of glaciers in the barren rocky gorges that intersect the summits of the mountains , the Inn of Schwarenbach serves as a resting place for travellers crossing the Gemini Pass .
2	It remains open for six months in the year and is inhabited by the family of Jean Hauser ; then , as soon as the snow begins to fall and to fill the valley so as to make the road down to Loeche impassable , the father and his three sons go away and leave the house in charge of the old guide , Gaspard Hari , with the young guide , Ulrich Kunsi , and Sam , the great mountain dog .
3	The two men and the dog remain till the spring in their snowy prison , with nothing before their eyes except the immense white slopes of the Balmhorn , surrounded by light , glistening summits , and are shut in , blocked up and buried by the snow which rises around them and which envelops , binds and crushes the little house , which lies piled on the roof , covering the windows and blocking up the door .
4	It was the day on which the Hauser family were going to return to Loeche , as winter was approaching , and the descent was becoming dangerous .
5	Three mules started first , laden with baggage and led by the three sons .
6	Then the mother , Jeanne Hauser , and her daughter Louise mounted a fourth mule and set off in their turn and the father followed them , accompanied by the two men in charge , who were to escort the family as far as the brow of the descent .
7	First of all they passed round the small lake , which was now frozen over , at the bottom of the mass of rocks which stretched in front of the inn , and then they followed the valley , which was dominated on all sides by the snow-covered summits .
8	A ray of sunlight fell into that little white , glistening , frozen desert and illuminated it with a cold and dazzling flame . No living thing appeared among this ocean of mountains . There was no motion in this immeasurable solitude and no noise disturbed the profound silence .
9	By degrees the young guide , Ulrich Kunsi , a tall , long-legged Swiss , left old man Hauser and old Gaspard behind , in order to catch up the mule which bore the two women .
10	The younger one looked at him as he approached and appeared to be calling him with her sad eyes .
11	She was a young , fairhaired little peasant girl , whose milk-white cheeks and pale hair looked as if they had lost their color by their long abode amid the ice .
12	When he had got up to the animal she was riding he put his hand on the crupper and relaxed his speed .
13	Mother Hauser began to talk to him , enumerating with the minutest details all that he would have to attend to during the winter .
14	It was the first time that he was going to stay up there , while old Hari had already spent fourteen winters amid the snow , at the inn of Schwarenbach .
15	Ulrich Kunsi listened , without appearing to understand and looked incessantly at the girl .
16	From time to time he replied :
17	" Yes , Madame Hauser , " but his thoughts seemed far away and his calm features remained unmoved .
18	They reached Lake Daube , whose broad , frozen surface extended to the end of the valley .
19	On the right one saw the black , pointed , rocky summits of the Daubenhorn beside the enormous moraines of the Lommern glacier , above which rose the Wildstrubel .
20	As they approached the Gemmi pass , where the descent of Loeche begins , they suddenly beheld the immense horizon of the Alps of the Valais , from which the broad , deep valley of the Rhone separated them .
21	In the distance there was a group of white , unequal , flat , or pointed mountain summits , which glistened in the sun ; the Mischabel with its two peaks , the huge group of the Weisshorn , the heavy Brunegghorn , the lofty and formidable pyramid of Mount Cervin , that slayer of men , and the Dent-Blanche , that monstrous coquette .
22	Then beneath them , in a tremendous hole , at the bottom of a terrific abyss , they perceived Loeche , where houses looked as grains of sand which had been thrown into that enormous crevice that is ended and closed by the Gemmi and which opens , down below , on the Rhone .
23	The mule stopped at the edge of the path , which winds and turns continually , doubling backward , then , fantastically and strangely , along the side of the mountain as far as the almost invisible little village at its feet .
24	The women jumped into the snow and the two old men joined them .
25	"Well , " father Hauser said , " good-by , and keep up your spirits till next year , my friends , " and old Hari replied :
26	" Till next year . "
27	They embraced each other and then Madame Hauser in her turn offered her cheek , and the girl did the same .
28	When Ulrich Kunsi 's turn came , he whispered in Louise 's ear , " Do not forget those up yonder , " and she replied , " No , " in such a low voice that he guessed what she had said without hearing it .
29	" Well , adieu , " Jean Hauser repeated , " and don 't fall ill . "
30	And going before the two women , he commenced the descent , and soon all three disappeared at the first turn in the road , while the two men returned to the inn at Schwarenbach .
31	They walked slowly , side by side , without speaking .
32	It was over , and they would be alone together for four or five months .
33	Then Gaspard Hari began to relate his life last winter .
34	He had remained with Michael Canol , who was too old now to stand it , for an accident might happen during that long solitude .
35	They had not been dull , however ; the only thing was to make up one 's mind to it from the first , and in the end one would find plenty of distraction , games and other means of whiling away the time .
36	Ulrich Kunsi listened to him with his eyes on the ground , for in his thoughts he was following those who were descending to the village .
37	They soon came in sight of the inn , which was , however , scarcely visible , so small did it look , a black speck at the foot of that enormous billow of snow , and when they opened the door Sam , the great curly dog , began to romp round them .
38	" Come , my boy , " old Gaspard said , " we have no women now , so we must get our own dinner ready . Go and peel the potatoes . "
39	And they both sat down on wooden stools and began to prepare the soup .
40	The next morning seemed very long to Kunsi .
41	Old Hari smoked and spat on the hearth , while the young man looked out of the window at the snow-covered mountain opposite the house .
42	In the afternoon he went out , and going over yesterday 's ground again , he looked for the traces of the mule that had carried the two women .
43	Then when he had reached the Gemmi Pass , he laid himself down on his stomach and looked at Loeche .
44	The village , in its rocky pit , was not yet buried under the snow , from which it was sheltered by the pine woods which protected it on all sides .
45	Its low houses looked like paving stones in a large meadow from above .
46	Hauser 's little daughter was there now in one of those gray-colored houses .
47	In which ?
48	Ulrich Kunsi was too far away to be able to make them out separately .
49	How he would have liked to go down while he was yet able !
50	But the sun had disappeared behind the lofty crest of the Wildstrubel and the young man returned to the chalet .
51	Daddy Hari was smoking , and when he saw his mate come in he proposed a game of cards to him , and they sat down opposite each other , on either side of the table .
52	They played for a long time a simple game called brisque and then they had supper and went to bed .
53	The following days were like the first , bright and cold , without any fresh snow .
54	Old Gaspard spent his afternoons in watching the eagles and other rare birds which ventured on those frozen heights , while Ulrich returned regularly to the Gemmi Pass to look at the village .
55	Then they played cards , dice or dominoes and lost and won a trifle , just to create an interest in the game .
56	One morning Hari , who was up first , called his companion .
57	A moving , deep and light cloud of white spray was falling on them noiselessly and was by degrees burying them under a thick , heavy coverlet of foam .
58	That lasted four days and four nights .
59	It was necessary to free the door and the windows , to dig out a passage and to cut steps to get over this frozen powder , which a twelve hours ' frost had made as hard as the granite of the moraines .
60	They lived like prisoners and did not venture outside their abode .
61	They had divided their duties , which they performed regularly .
62	Ulrich Kunsi undertook the scouring , washing and everything that belonged to cleanliness .
63	He also chopped up the wood while Gaspard Hari did the cooking and attended to the fire .
64	Their regular and monotonous work was interrupted by long games at cards or dice , and they never quarrelled , but were always calm and placid .
65	They were never seen impatient or ill-humored , nor did they ever use hard words , for they had laid in a stock of patience for their wintering on the top of the mountain .
66	Sometimes old Gaspard took his rifle and went after chamois , and occasionally he killed one .
67	Then there was a feast in the inn at Schwarenbach and they revelled in fresh meat .
68	One morning he went out as usual .
69	The thermometer outside marked eighteen degrees of frost , and as the sun had not yet risen , the hunter hoped to surprise the animals at the approaches to the Wildstrubel , and Ulrich , being alone , remained in bed until ten o'clock .
70	He was of a sleepy nature , but he would not have dared to give way like that to his inclination in the presence of the old guide , who was ever an early riser .
71	He breakfasted leisurely with Sam , who also spent his days and nights in sleeping in front of the fire ; then he felt low-spirited and even frightened at the solitude , and was-seized by a longing for his daily game of cards , as one is by the craving of a confirmed habit , and so he went out to meet his companion , who was to return at four o'clock .
72	The snow had levelled the whole deep valley , filled up the crevasses , obliterated all signs of the two lakes and covered the rocks , so that between the high summits there was nothing but an immense , white , regular , dazzling and frozen surface .
73	For three weeks Ulrich had not been to the edge of the precipice from which he had looked down on the village , and he wanted to go there before climbing the slopes which led to Wildstrubel .
74	Loeche was now also covered by the snow and the houses could scarcely be distinguished , covered as they were by that white cloak .
75	Then , turning to the right , he reached the Loemmern glacier .
76	He went along with a mountaineer 's long strides , striking the snow , which was as hard as a rock , with his iron-pointed stick , and with his piercing eyes he looked for the little black , moving speck in the distance , on that enormous , white expanse .
77	When he reached the end of the glacier he stopped and asked himself whether the old man had taken that road , and then he began to walk along the moraines with rapid and uneasy steps .
78	The day was declining , the snow was assuming a rosy tint , and a dry , frozen wind blew in rough gusts over its crystal surface .
79	Ulrich uttered a long , shrill , vibrating call .
80	His voice sped through the deathlike silence in which the mountains were sleeping ; it reached the distance , across profound and motionless waves of glacial foam , like the cry of a bird across the waves of the sea . Then it died away and nothing answered him .
81	He began to walk again .
82	The sun had sunk yonder behind the mountain tops , which were still purple with the reflection from the sky , but the depths of the valley were becoming gray , and suddenly the young man felt frightened .
83	It seemed to him as if the silence , the cold , the solitude , the winter death of these mountains were taking possession of him , were going to stop and to freeze his blood , to make his limbs grow stiff and to turn him into a motionless and frozen object , and he set off running , fleeing toward his dwelling .
84	The old man , he thought , would have returned during his absence .
85	He had taken another road ; he would , no doubt , be sitting before the fire , with a dead chamois at his feet .
86	He soon came in sight of the inn , but no smoke rose from it .
87	Ulrich walked faster and opened the door .
88	Sam ran up to him to greet him , but Gaspard Hari had not returned .
89	Kunsi , in his alarm , turned round suddenly , as if he had expected to find his comrade hidden in a corner .
90	Then he relighted the fire and made the soup , hoping every moment to see the old man come in .
91	From time to time he went out to see if he were not coming .
92	It was quite night now , that wan , livid night of the mountains , lighted by a thin , yellow crescent moon , just disappearing behind the mountain tops .
93	Then the young man went in and sat down to warm his hands and feet , while he pictured to himself every possible accident .
94	Gaspard might have broken a leg , have fallen into a crevasse , taken a false step and dislocated his ankle .
95	And , perhaps , he was lying on the snow , overcome and stiff with the cold , in agony of mind , lost and , perhaps , shouting for help , calling with all his might in the silence of the night ..
96	But where ?
97	The mountain was so vast , so rugged , so dangerous in places , especially at that time of the year , that it would have required ten or twenty guides to walk for a week in all directions to find a man in that immense space .
98	Ulrich Kunsi , however , made up his mind to set out with Sam if Gaspard did not return by one in the morning , and he made his preparations .
99	He put provisions for two days into a bag , took his steel climbing iron , tied a long , thin , strong rope round his waist , and looked to see that his iron-shod stick and his axe , which served to cut steps in the ice , were in order .
100	Then he waited .
101	The fire was burning on the hearth , the great dog was snoring in front of it , and the clock was ticking , as regularly as a heart beating , in its resounding wooden case .
102	He waited , with his ears on the alert for distant sounds , and he shivered when the wind blew against the roof and the walls .
103	It struck twelve and he trembled :
104	Then , frightened and shivering , he put some water on the fire , so that he might have some hot coffee before starting , and when the clock struck one he got up , woke Sam , opened the door and went off in the direction of the Wildstrubel .
105	For five hours he mounted , scaling the rocks by means of his climbing irons , cutting into the ice , advancing continually , and occasionally hauling up the dog , who remained below at the foot of some slope that was too steep for him , by means of the rope .
106	It was about six o'clock when he reached one of the summits to which old Gaspard often came after chamois , and he waited till it should be daylight .
107	The sky was growing pale overhead , and a strange light , springing nobody could tell whence , suddenly illuminated the immense ocean of pale mountain summits , which extended for a hundred leagues around him .
108	One might have said that this vague brightness arose from the snow itself and spread abroad in space .
109	By degrees the highest distant summits assumed a delicate , pink flesh color , and the red sun appeared behind the ponderous giants of the Bernese Alps .
110	Ulrich Kunsi set off again , walking like a hunter , bent over , looking for tracks , and saying to his dog :
111	" Seek , old fellow , seek ! "
112	He was descending the mountain now , scanning the depths closely , and from time to time shouting , uttering aloud , prolonged cry , which soon died away in that silent vastness .
113	Then he put his ear to the ground to listen . He thought he could distinguish a voice , and he began to run and shouted again , but he heard nothing more and sat down , exhausted and in despair .
114	Toward midday he breakfasted and gave Sam , who was as tired as himself , something to eat also , and then he recommenced his search .
115	When evening came he was still walking , and he had walked more than thirty miles over the mountains .
116	As he was too far away to return home and too tired to drag himself along any further , he dug a hole in the snow and crouched in it with his dog under a blanket which he had brought with him .
117	And the man and the dog lay side by side , trying to keep warm , but frozen to the marrow nevertheless .
118	Ulrich scarcely slept , his mind haunted by visions and his limbs shaking with cold .
119	Day was breaking when he got up .
120	His legs were as stiff as iron bars and his spirits so low that he was ready to cry with anguish , while his heart was beating so that he almost fell over with agitation , when he thought he heard a noise .
121	Suddenly he imagined that he also was going to die of cold in the midst of this vast solitude , and the terror of such a death roused his energies and gave him renewed vigor .
122	He was descending toward the inn , falling down and getting up again , and followed at a distance by Sam , who was limping on three legs , and they did not reach Schwarenbach until four o'clock in the afternoon .
123	The house was empty and the young man made a fire , had something to eat and went to sleep , so worn out that he did not think of anything more .
124	He slept for a long time , for a very long time , an irresistible sleep .
125	But suddenly a voice , a cry , a name , " Ulrich ! " aroused him from his profound torpor and made him sit up in bed .
126	Had he been dreaming ?
127	Was it one of those strange appeals which cross the dreams of disquieted minds ?
128	No , he heard it still , that reverberating cry - which had entered his ears and remained in his flesh - to the tips of his sinewy fingers .
129	Certainly somebody had cried out and called " Ulrich ! "
130	There was somebody there near the house , there could be no doubt of that , and he opened the door and shouted , " Is it you , Gaspard ? " with all the strength of his lungs .
131	But there was no reply , no murmur , no groan , nothing .
132	It was quite dark and the snow looked wan .
133	The wind had risen , that icy wind that cracks the rocks and leaves nothing alive on those deserted heights , and it came in sudden gusts , which were more parching and more deadly than the burning wind of the desert , and again Ulrich shouted :
134	" Gaspard !
135	Gaspard !
136	Gaspard . "
137	And then he waited again .
138	Everything was silent on the mountain .
139	Then he shook with terror and with a bound he was inside the inn , when he shut and bolted the door , and then he fell into a chair trembling all over , for he felt certain that his comrade had called him at the moment he was expiring .
140	He was sure of that , as sure as one is of being alive or of eating a piece of bread .
141	Old Gaspard Hari had been dying for two days and three nights somewhere , in some hole , in one of those deep , untrodden ravines whose whiteness is more sinister than subterranean darkness .
142	He had been dying for two days and three nights and he had just then died , thinking of his comrade .
143	His soul , almost before it was released , had taken its flight to the inn where Ulrich was sleeping , and it had called him by that terrible and mysterious power which the spirits of the dead have to haunt the living .
144	That voiceless soul had cried to the worn-out soul of the sleeper ; it had uttered its last farewell , or its reproach , or its curse on the man who had not searched carefully enough .
145	And Ulrich felt that it was there , quite close to him , behind the wall , behind the door which he had just fastened .
146	It was wandering about , like a night bird which lightly touches a lighted window with his wings , and the terrified young man was ready to scream with horror .
147	He wanted to run away , but did not dare to go out ; he did not dare , and he should never dare to do it in the future , for that phantom would remain there day and night , round the inn , as long as the old man 's body was not recovered and had not been deposited in the consecrated earth of a churchyard .
148	When it was daylight Kunsi recovered some of his courage at the return of the bright sun .
149	He prepared his meal , gave his dog some food and then remained motionless on a chair , tortured at heart as he thought of the old man lying on the snow , and then , as soon as night once more covered the mountains , new terrors assailed him .
150	He now walked up and down the dark kitchen , which was scarcely lighted by the flame of one candle , and he walked from one end of it to the other with great strides , listening , listening whether the terrible cry of the other night would again break the dreary silence outside .
151	He felt himself alone , unhappy man , as no man had ever been alone before !
152	He was alone in this immense desert of Snow , alone five thousand feet above the inhabited earth , above human habitation , above that stirring , noisy , palpitating life , alone under an icy sky !
153	A mad longing impelled him to run away , no matter where , to get down to Loeche by flinging himself over the precipice ; but he did not even dare to open the door , as he felt sure that the other , the dead man , would bar his road , so that he might not be obliged to remain up there alone :
154	Toward midnight , tired with walking , worn out by grief and fear , he at last fell into a doze in his chair , for he was afraid of his bed as one is of a haunted spot .
155	But suddenly the strident cry of the other evening pierced his ears , and it was so shrill that Ulrich stretched out his arms to repulse the ghost , and he fell backward with his chair .
156	Sam , who was awakened by the noise , began to howl as frightened dogs do howl , and he walked all about the house trying to find out where the danger came from .
157	When he got to the door , he sniffed beneath it , smelling vigorously , with his coat bristling and his tail stiff , while he growled angrily .
158	Kunsi , who was terrified , jumped up , and , holding his chair by one leg , he cried :
159	" Don 't come in , don 't come in , or I shall kill you . "
160	And the dog , excited by this threat , barked angrily at that invisible enemy who defied his master 's voice .
161	By degrees , however , he quieted down and came back and stretched himself in front of the fire , but he was uneasy and kept his head up and growled between his teeth .
162	Ulrich , in turn , recovered his senses , but as he felt faint with terror , he went and got a bottle of brandy out of the sideboard , and he drank off several glasses , one after anther , at a gulp .
163	His ideas became vague , his courage revived and a feverish glow ran through his veins .
164	He ate scarcely anything the next day and limited himself to alcohol , and so he lived for several days , like a drunken brute .
165	As soon as he thought of Gaspard Hari , he began to drink again , and went on drinking until he fell to the ground , overcome by intoxication .
166	And there he remained lying on his face , dead drunk , his limbs benumbed , and snoring loudly .
167	But scarcely had he digested the maddening and burning liquor than the same cry , " Ulrich ! " woke him like a bullet piercing his brain , and he got up , still staggering , stretching out his hands to save himself from falling , and calling to Sam to help him .
168	And the dog , who appeared to be going mad like his master , rushed to the door , scratched it with his claws and gnawed it with his long white teeth , while the young man , with his head thrown back drank the brandy in draughts , as if it had been cold water , so that it might by and by send his thoughts , his frantic terror , and his memory to sleep again .
169	In three weeks he had consumed all his stock of ardent spirits .
170	But his continual drunkenness only lulled his terror , which awoke more furiously than ever as soon as it was impossible for him to calm it .
171	His fixed idea then , which had been intensified by a month of drunkenness , and which was continually increasing in his absolute solitude , penetrated him like a gimlet .
172	He now walked about the house like a wild beast in its cage , putting his ear to the door to listen if the other were there and defying him through the wall .
173	Then , as soon as he dozed , overcome by fatigue , he heard the voice which made him leap to his feet .
174	At last one night , as cowards do when driven to extremities , he sprang to the door and opened it , to see who was calling him and to force him to keep quiet , but such a gust of cold wind blew into his face that it chilled him to the bone , and he closed and bolted the door again immediately , without noticing that Sam had rushed out .
175	Then , as he was shivering with cold , he threw some wood on the fire and sat down in front of it to warm himself , but suddenly he started , for somebody was scratching at the wall and crying .
176	In desperation he called out :
177	" Go away ! " but was answered by another long , sorrowful wail .
178	Then all his remaining senses forsook him from sheer fright .
179	He repeated :
180	" Go away ! " and turned round to try to find some corner in which to hide , while the other person went round the house still crying and rubbing against the wall .
181	Ulrich went to the oak sideboard , which was full of plates and dishes and of provisions , and lifting it up with superhuman strength , he dragged it to the door , so as to form a barricade .
182	Then piling up all the rest of the furniture , the mattresses , palliasses and chairs , he stopped up the windows as one does when assailed by an enemy .
183	But the person outside now uttered long , plaintive , mournful groans , to which the young man replied by similar groans , and thus days and nights passed without their ceasing to howl at each other .
184	The one was continually walking round the house and scraped the walls with his nails so vigorously that it seemed as if he wished to destroy them , while the other , inside , followed all his movements , stooping down and holding his ear to the walls and replying to all his appeals with terrible cries .
185	One evening , however , Ulrich heard nothing more , and he sat down , so overcome by fatigue , that he went to sleep immediately and awoke in the morning without a thought , without any recollection of what had happened , just as if his head had been emptied during his heavy sleep , but he felt hungry , and he ate .
186	The winter was over and the Gemmi Pass was practicable again , so the Hauser family started off to return to their inn .
187	As soon as they had reached the top of the ascent the women mounted their mule and spoke about the two men whom they would meet again shortly .
188	They were , indeed , rather surprised that neither of them had come down a few days before , as soon as the road was open , in order to tell them all about their long winter sojourn .
189	At last , however , they saw the inn , still covered with snow , like a quilt .
190	The door and the window were closed , but a little smoke was coming out of the chimney , which reassured old Hauser .
191	On going up to the door , however , he saw the skeleton of an animal which had been torn to pieces by the eagles , a large skeleton lying on its side .
192	They all looked close at it and the mother said : " That must be Sam , " and then she shouted :
193	" Hi , Gaspard ! "
194	A cry from the interior of the house answered her and a sharp cry that one might have thought some animal had uttered it .
195	Old Hauser repeated , " Hi , Gaspard ! " and they heard another cry similar to the first .
196	Then the three men , the father and the two sons , tried to open the door , but it resisted their efforts .
197	From the empty cow-stall they took a beam to serve as a battering-ram and hurled it against the door with all their might .
198	The wood gave way and the boards flew into splinters . Then the house was shaken by a loud voice , and inside , behind the side board which was overturned , they saw a man standing upright , with his hair falling on his shoulders and a beard descending to his breast , with shining eyes , and nothing but rags to cover him .
199	They did not recognize him , but Louise Hauser exclaimed :
200	" It is Ulrich , mother . "
201	And her mother declared that it was Ulrich , although his hair was white .
202	He allowed them to go up to him and to touch him , but he did not reply to any of their questions , and they were obliged to take him to Loeche , where the doctors found that he was mad , and nobody ever found out what had become of his companion .
203	Little Louise Hauser nearly died that summer of decline , which the physicians attributed to the cold air of the mountains .
