0	The Last Lesson
1	I started for school very late that morning and was in great dread of scolding , especially because M. Hamel had said that he would question us on participles , and I did not know the first word about them .
2	For a moment I thought of running away and spending the day out of doors .
3	It was so warm , so bright !
4	The birds were chirping at the edge of the woods ; and in the open field back of the sawmill the Prussian soldiers were drilling .
5	It was all much more tempting than the rule for participles , but I had the strength to resist , and hurried off to school .
6	When I passed the town hall there was a crowd in front of the bulletin-board .
7	For the last two years all our bad news had come from there - the lost battles , the draft , the orders of commanding officer - and I thought to myself , without stopping , " What can be the matter now ? "
8	Then , as I hurried by as fast as I could go , the blacksmith , Wachter , who was there , with his apprentice , reading the bulletin , called after me , " Don 't go so fast , bub ; you 'll get to your school in plenty of time ! "
9	I thought he was making fun of me , and reached M. Hamel 's little garden all out of breath .
10	Usually when school began , there was a great bustle , which could be heard out in the street , the opening and closing of desks , lessons repeated in unison , very loud , with our hands over our ears to understand better , and the teacher 's great ruler rapping on the table .
11	I had counted on the commotion to get to my desk without being seen ; but , of course , that day everything had to be as quiet as Sunday morning .
12	Through the window I saw my classmates , already in their places , and M. Hamel walking up and down with his terrible iron ruler under his arm .
13	I had to open the door and go in before everybody .
14	You can imagine how I blushed and how frightened I was .
15	But nothing happened .
16	M. Hamel saw me and said very kindly , " Go to your place quickly little Franz . We were beginning without you . "
17	I jumped over the bench and sat down at my desk .
18	Not till then , when I had got a little over my fright , did I see that our teacher had on his beautiful green coat , his frilled shirt , and the little black silk cap , all embroidered , that he never wore except on inspection and prize days .
19	Besides the whole school seemed so strange and solemn .
20	But the thing that surprised me most was to see , on the back benches that were always empty , the village people sitting quietly like ourselves ; old Hauser , with his three-cornered hat , the former mayor , the former postmaster , and several others besides .
21	Everybody looked sad ; and Hauser had brought an old primer , thumbed at the edges , and he held it open on his knees with his great spectacles lying across the pages .
22	While I was wondering about it all , M. Hamel mounted his chair , and in the same grave and gentle tone which he had used to me , said , " My children , this is the last lesson I shall give you .
23	The order has come from Berlin to teach only German in the schools of Alsace and Lorraine .
24	The new master comes tomorrow .
25	This is your last French lesson .
26	I want you to be very attentive . "
27	What a thunderclap these words were to me !
28	Oh , the wretches ; that was what they had put up at the town hall !
29	My last French lesson !
30	Why , I hardly knew how to write !
31	I should never learn anymore !
32	I must stop there then !
33	Oh , how sorry I was for not learning my lessons , for seeking birds ' eggs , or going sliding on the Saar !
34	My books , that had seemed such a nuisance a while ago , so heavy to carry , my grammar , and my history of the saints , were old friends now that I couldn 't give up .
35	And M. Hamel , too ; the idea that he was going away , that I should never see him again , made me forget all about his ruler and how cranky he was .
36	Poor man !
37	It was in honour of this last lesson that he had put on his fine Sunday clothes , and now I understood why the old men of the village were sitting there in the back of the room .
38	It was because they were sorry , too , that they had not gone to school more .
39	It was their way of thanking our master for his forty years of faithful service and of showing their respect for the country that was theirs no more .
40	While I was thinking of all this , I heard my name called .
41	It was my turn to recite .
42	What would I not have given to be able to say that dreadful rule for the partciple all through , very loud and clear , and without one mistake ? But I got mixed up on the first words and stood there , holding on to my desk , my heart beating , and not daring to look up .
43	I heard M. Hamel say to me , " I won 't scold you little Franz ; you must feel bad enough .
44	See how it is !
45	Everyday we have said to ourselves . '
46	Bah ! I 've plenty of time .
47	I 'll learn it tomorrow . '
48	And now you see where we 've come out .
49	Ah , that 's the great trouble with Alsace ; she puts off learning till tomorrow .
50	Now those fellows out there will have the right to say to you , ' How is it ; you pretend to be Frenchmen , and yet you can neither speak nor write your own language ? '
51	But you are not the worse , poor little Franz .
52	We 've all a great deal to reproach ourselves with . "
53	Your parents were not anxious enough to have you learn .
54	They preferred to put you to work on a farm or at the mills , so as to have a little more money And I ? I 've been to blame also .
55	Have I not often sent you to water my flowers instead of learning your lessons ?
56	And when I wanted to go fishing , did I not just give you a holiday ? "
57	Then , from one thing to another , M. Hamel went on to talk of the French language , saying that it was the most beautiful language in the world - the clearest , the most logical ; that we must guard it among us and never forget it , because when people are enslaved , as long as they hold fast to their language it is as if they had the key to their prison .
58	Then he opened a grammar and read us our lesson .
59	I was amazed to see how well I understood it .
60	All he said seemed so easy !
61	I think , too , that I had never listened so carefully , and that he had never explained everything with so much patience .
62	It seemed almost as if the poor man wanted to give all he knew before going away , and to put it all into our heads at one stroke .
63	After the grammar , we had a lesson in writing .
64	That day M. Hamel had new copies for us , written in beautiful round hand - France , Alsace , France , Alsace .
65	They looked like little flags floating everywhere in the school-room , hung from the rod at the top of our desks .
66	You ought to have seen how every one set to work , and how quiet it was !
67	The only sound was the scratching of the pens over the paper .
68	Once some beetles flew in ; but nobody paid any attention to them , not even the littlest ones , who worked right on tracing their fish-hooks , as if that was French , too .
69	On the roof the pigeons cooed very low , and I thought to myself , " Will they make them sing in German , even the pigeons ? "
70	Whenever I looked up from my writing I saw M. Hamel sitting motionless in his chair and gazing first at one thing , then at another , as if he wanted to fix in his mind just how everything looked in that little school-room .
71	Fancy ! For forty years he had been there in the same place , with his garden outside the window and his class in front of him , just like that .
72	Only the desks and benches had been worn smooth ; the walnut-trees in the garden were taller , and the hopvine that he had planted himself twined about the windows to the roof .
73	How it must have broken his heart to leave it all , poor man ; to hear his sister moving about in the room above , packing their trunks !
74	For they must leave the country next day .
75	But he had the courage to hear every lesson to the very last .
76	After the writing , we had a lesson in history , and then the babies chanted their ba , be bi , bo , bu .
77	Down there at the back of the room old Hauser had put on his spectacles and , holding his primer in both hands , spelled the letters with them .
78	You could see that he , too , was crying ; his voice trembled with emotion , and it was so funny to hear him that we all wanted to laugh and cry .
79	Ah , how well I remember it , that last lesson !
80	All at once the church-clock struck twelve . Then the Angelus .
81	At the same moment the trumpets of the Prussians , returning from drill , sounded under our windows .
82	M. Hamel stood up , very pale , in his chair .
83	I never saw him look so tall .
84	" My friends , " said he , " I - I - "
85	But something choked him .
86	He could not go on .
87	Then he turned to the blackboard , took a piece of chalk , and bearing on with all his might , he wrote as large as he could -
88	" Vive La France ! "
89	Then he stopped and leaned his head against the wall , and , without a word , he made a gesture to us with his hand -
90	" School is dismissed -
91	you may go . "
