0	THE VISION OF CHARLES XI
1	" There are more things in heav 'n and earth , Horatio , Than are dreamt of in your philosophy . "
2	Shakspeare : Hamlet .
3	THOUGH people laugh at visions and supernatural apparitions , several have been too well authenticated to be discredited , for , should one be consistent , it would be necessary to ignore the whole witness of historic evidence .
4	A correctly drawn-up report , signed by four reliable witnesses , is the guarantee of the truth of the incident about to be related .
5	I should add that the prediction set forth in this report was so set forth and cited a very long time before the events occurred in our days which seemed to fulfil it .
6	Charles XI , father of the famous Charles XII , was a most despotic king , but at the same time the wisest of the monarchs who have reigned over Sweden .
7	He restricted the overbearing privileges of the nobility , abolished the power of the Senate , and created laws by his own authority ; in fact , he changed the constitution of the country , which before was an oligarchy , and compelled the states to vest the absolute control in him .
8	He was , besides , an enlightened man , steadfastly attached to the Lutheran religion , brave , of an inflexible , self-contained , decided character , and entirely devoid of imagination .
9	He had just lost his wife , Ulrique Eléonore .
10	Although it is said that his severity had hastened her end , he held her in esteem , and appeared more affected by her death than would have been expected of a man so hard of heart .
11	After that event he grew still more taciturn and gloomy than before , and gave himself up to work with an application that showed an urgent desire to dispel sad thoughts .
12	At the close of one autumn evening he was sitting in his private apartment in the Stockholm Palace , in his dressing-gown and slippers , before a great fire .
13	With him was his chamberlain , Count Brahé , who was one of his most favoured courtiers , and his physician , Baumgarten , who , it may be remarked in passing , set up for a sceptic , and who would have liked people to disbelieve in everything but in medicine .
14	This night he had been summoned to advise on some slight ailment .
15	The evening lengthened , but contrary to his habit the King made no sign of dismissal to his companions .
16	He sat in deep silence , his head lowered , and his eyes fixed upon the burning logs , wearied of their company , but afraid , without knowing why , of being left alone .
17	Count Brahé had shrewdly observed that his presence was distasteful to the King , and had several times hinted that he feared His Majesty was in need of repose ; but the King had signified by a gesture that he wished him to remain .
18	The physician , in his turn , spoke of the ill-effects to health of keeping late hours . Charles only muttered , " Stay where you are ; I have no desire to sleep yet . "
19	At this stage the courtiers tried several different topics of conversation , but all fell flat at the end of the second or third sentence .
20	It was evident that His Majesty was in one of his black moods , and in such circumstance the position of a courtier is decidedly delicate .
21	Count Brahé , suspecting that the King was brooding over the loss of his wife , gazed for some time at the portrait of the Queen which hung on the wall of the room , and remarked with a deep sigh —
22	" What an excellent likeness !
23	Just the expression she wore , so majestic and yet so gentle . "
24	" Bah ! " the King broke in rudely . " That portrait is too flattering . The Queen was ugly . " He was always suspicious of there being underlying reproaches whenever anyone mentioned her name in his presence .
25	Then , vexed at his harsliness , he rose and paced the room to hide a blush of shame .
26	He stopped in front of the window which looked on to the courtyard .
27	It was a dark night and the moon was in its first quarter .
28	The palace in which the Kings of Sweden now reside was not then finished , so that Charles XI , who had begun it , lived then in the old palace on the promontory of Ritterholm overlooking the Lake Moeler .
29	It was a vast building in the form of a horse-shoe .
30	The King 's cabinet was at one of the extremities , and nearly , opposite it was the large audience hall where Parliament assembled to receive communications from the Crown .
31	The windows of this chamber appeared to be illuminated with a bright light .
32	This struck the King as strange , but at first he thought the light might be produced by the torch of some valet .
33	Still , what could anybody be doing there at such an hour , and in a room which had not been opened for some time ?
34	Besides , the light was too bright to proceed from a single torch .
35	It might be the work of an incendiary , but there was no smoke , and the windows were not broken . Charles watched the windows some time in silence . No sound could be heard ; everything betokened simply an illumination .
36	Meanwhile Count Brahe extended his hand toward the bell-rope to summon a page in order to send him to find out the cause of this singular light , but the King stopped him .
37	" I will go to the hall myself , " he said .
38	Whilst he spoke they saw his face grow pale with superstitious fear ; but he went out with a firm tread , followed by the chamberlain and physician , each holding a lighted candle .
39	Baumgarten went to rouse the sleeping porter who had charge of the keys with an order from the King to open immediately the doors of the assembly hall .
40	The man was greatly surprised at this unexpected order . He dressed himself quickly , and joined the King with his bunch of keys .
41	At first he opened the door of a gallery which was used as an antechamber or private entrance to the assembly hall .
42	The King entered . Imagine his surprise at finding the walls completely draped in black .
43	" Who gave the order for hanging this room thus ? "
44	he demanded angrily .
45	" No one , Sire , to my knowledge , " replied the uneasy porter .
46	" The last time I swept out the gallery it was panelled , as it always has been , ...
47	I am certain this hanging never came out of Your Majesty 's depository . "
48	The King , walking at a rapid pace , had already traversed more than two-thirds of the gallery .
49	The Count and porter followed closely ; the physician Baumgarten was a little behind , divided between his fears of being left alone and of being exposed to the consequences of what promised to be such a strange adventure .
50	" Go no further , Sire , " exclaimed the porter .
51	" Upon my soul , there is sorcery behind this .
52	At such an hour . . . and since the death of the Queen , your gracious wife . . , they say she walks in this gallery . . . .
53	May God protect us ! "
54	" Stop , Sire , " entreated the Count in turn .
55	" Do you not hear the noise that comes from the assembly hall ?
56	Who knows to what dangers Your Majesty may be exposed ? "
57	" Sire , " broke in Baumgarten , whose candle had just been blown out by a gust of wind , " at least allow me to go and fetch a score of your hal- berdiers . "
58	" Let us go in , " said the King sternly , stop ping before the door of the great apartment . " Porter , open the door immediately . "
59	He kicked it with his feet , and the noise , echoing from the roof , resounded along the gal- lery like the report of a cannon .
60	The porter trembled so much that he could not find the keyhole .
61	" An old soldier trembling ! "
62	said Charles , shrugging his shoulders , " Come , Count , you open the door . "
63	" Sire , " replied the Count , recoiling a step , " if Your Majesty commanded me to walk up to the mouth of a German or a Danish cannon I would obey unhesitatingly , but you wish me to defy the powers of hell . "
64	The King snatched the key from the hands of the porter .
65	" I quite see , " he observed contemptuously , " that I must attend this matter myself , " and before his suite could stay him he had opened the heavy oaken door and entered the great hall , pronouncing the words " By the power of God ! "
66	His three acolytes , urged by a curiosity stronger than their fear — and perhaps ashamed to de- sert their King — went in after him .
67	The great hall was lighted up by innumerable torches , and the old figured tapestry had been replaced by black hangings .
68	Along the walls hung , as usual , the German , Danish , and Russian flags — trophies taken by the soldiers of Gustavus Adolphus .
69	In their midst were the Swedish banners , covered with crape as for a funeral .
70	An immense assembly fiUed the seats .
71	The four orders of the State ( the nobility , clergy , citizens and peasants ) were arranged in their proper order .
72	All were clothed in black , and this array of human faces , lit up against a dark background , so dazzled the eyes of the four witnesses of this extraordinary scene that not one figure was recognisable in the crowd .
73	Thus an actor who stands before a large audience is not able to distinguish a single individual ; he sees but a confused mass of faces .
74	Seated on the raised throne from which the King usually addressed his Parliament , they saw a bleeding corpse clothed in the royal insignia .
75	At his right stood a child with a crown on his head and a sceptre in his hand ; at his left an old man , or rather another spectre , leant against the throne .
76	He wore the State cloak as used by the former adminstrators of Sweden before Vasa had made it a kingdom .
77	In front of the throne , seated before a table covered with large books and rolls of docimients , were several grave and austere-looking personages , clothed in long black robes , who looked like judges .
78	Between the throne and the seats of the assembly a block was raised covered with black crape ; against it lay an axe .
79	No one in that supernatural assembly seemed to notice the presence of Charles and the three people with him .
80	At their entry they could only hear at first a confused murmur of inarticulate words ; then the oldest of the black-robed judges arose — the one who seemed to be the president — and struck the book which lay open in front of him three times with his hand .
81	Deep silence immediately followed .
82	Then there came into the hall by a door opposite to that by which Charles had entered several young men of noble bearing and richly clad . Their hands were tied behind their backs , but they walked with heads erect and confident looks .
83	Behind them a stalwart man in a jerkin of brown leather held the ends of the cords which bound their hands .
84	The most important of the prisoners — he who walked first — stopped in the middle of the hall before the block and looked at it with supreme disdain .
85	While this was going on the corpse seemed to shake convulsively , and a fresh stream of crimson blood flowed out of its wound .
86	The youth kneeled down and laid his head on the block , the axe flashed in the air and the sound of its descent followed immediately .
87	A stream of blood gushed over the dais and mingled with that from the corpse ; the head bounded several times on the crimsoned pavement , and then rolled at the feet of Charles . It dyed him with its blood .
88	Up to this moment surprise had held the King dumb , but this frightful spectacle unloosed his tongue . He stepped forward toward the dais , and , addressing himself to the figure who was clothed in the administrator 's robes , he pronounced boldly the well-known form of words —
89	" If thou art of God , speak ; if thou art from the Other , leave us in peace . "
90	The phantom spoke to him slowly in solemn tones —
91	" King Chahles ! this blood will not be shed during your reign . . . " ( here the voice grew less distinct ) " but five reigns later .
92	Woe , woe , woe to the House of Vasa ! "
93	Then the spectres of the countless personages who formed this extraordinary assembly gradually became fainter , until they soon looked like coloured shadows , and then they completely disappeared . All the fantastic lights were extinguished , and those of Charles and his suite revealed only the old tapestries , slightly waving in the draught .
94	They heard for some time after ward a melodious sound , which one of the witnesses described as like the sighing of wind amongst leaves , and another to the rasping sound given by the strings of a harp that is being tuned .
95	All agreed as to the duration of the apparition , which they judged to have lasted about ten minutes .
96	The black draperies , the dissevered head , the drops of blood which had stained the dais — aU had vanished with the phantoms ; only upon Charles 's slipper was there a bloodstain . This was the sole witness left by which to recall the scene of that night , had it not been sufficiently engraved upon his memory .
97	When the King returned to his chamber he had an account written of what he had seen , signed it himself , and caused it to be signed by his fellow-witnesses .
98	In spite of the precautions taken to keep the contents of this document secret it was soon known , even during the lifetime of Charles XI . It still exists , and up to the pres- ent time no one has thought fit to throw doubts upon its authenticity .
99	In it the King concludes with these remarkable words : —
100	" And if that which I herein relate is not the simple truth , I renounce all my hope in the life to come , the which I may have merited for some good deeds done , and , above all , for my zeal in working for the welfare of my people , and in preserving the faith of my forefathers . "
101	Now , when the reader recollects the death of Gustavus III , and the doom of Ankarstroem , his assassin , they wiU find more than a mere coincidence between that event and the circimi- stances of this extraordinary prophecy .
102	The young man beheaded before the States Assembly should be called Ankarstroem .
103	The crowned corpse should be Gustavus III .
104	The child , his son and successor , Gustavus Adolphus IV .
105	Finally , the old man was the Duke of Sudermania , uncle of Gustavus IV , regent of the Crown , and , in the end , King , after the deposition of his nephew .
